You're going to feast on this one.
Conceptuality is something other than itself.
There's been a change in the image of thought.
That's what it is.
The internal structure of book.
As soon as an utterance slips from the mouth, it's divorced from the subject.
Thinking with.
Clappy clap time.
Three, two, one.
Switching it up.
What's it going back?
What's the countdown thing, man?
Like, don't change this shit.
We've been doing this for three years with a one, two, three.
And now you throw out, like, with no prep, no nothing.
You just suddenly start going three, two, one.
And I'm like, wait, what the?
You expect us to make sense of this on the fly?
Like, I can't think that fast, man.
I had no idea I even did anything different until you said something.
Hey, wait, can we do the introduction stuff?
Now that just made me think we've got to do the intro stuff.
Nathaniel, could you introduce us all?
Hey, everyone.
We're back with Thinking With.
This is our seventh episode on Friedrich Nietzsche's The Gay Science.
We're doing book three for the second episode in a row.
And we really focused last time on the opening aphorisms that sort of outlying the death of God and the sort of the fallout of the atheistic movement and the sort of the re-deification or the deification of sort of some of our most basic metaphysical concepts, including those of nature, cause and effect, truth, knowledge.
We're going to continue to talk about that, but then also try to make sense as to how the rest of this book sort of transitions or follows out of the sections on the death of God, which sort of explicitly end, although certainly not, I think, conceptually and thematically end on...
He's just going to fucking monologue for the whole episode?
What about us?
Wait, did we get introduced?
Don't bother to introduce Nate and John, because I've got some stuff I've got to say.
I didn't introduce myself.
I introduced Thinking With.
So, Thinking With is John Muckelbauer at South Carolina, Nate DeProspo at Oberlin, and Nathaniel Street up in Nova Scotia, Mount St. Vincent.
Mount St. Vincent.
Is there a Mount St. Vincent?
It's a hill, but it's...
But it is Mount St. Vincent.
It basically only goes, yeah, vertically.
There's a lot of...
You get a lot of glute work out.
It almost sounds like it would be a volcano, like Mount St. Helens.
Isn't that a volcano?
It does, it does.
Mount St. Helens.
Yeah.
But, yeah.
I mean, that would be hilarious, because I think it would...
The Mount...
I think the lava would explode out of the former nunnery, or, like, the nunnery that used to own the university.
Yeah.
So, there'd be a symbolism there of all kinds of things.
Okay, so apparently we're not done with the comedic portion.
We'll just continue.
This is just going to be the laugh track episode, right?
Because it's all about Christianity, so, you know...
Yeah.
Oh, this is the funniest section that we have read in a while.
There's some great moments that I really love, like, some of the materialist reduction stuff that he does,
that, like, Kaufman tries to, like, apologize for, where he's just like, you know, basically, you can blame, you know, all of the Orient's religions on rice.
And then, like, you know, Christianity is basically like...
Potatoes.
Potatoes and liquor.
It's from beer, you know, like, you're just like...
I mean, I love the idea.
To me, it's totally comedic, right?
Like, it's not...
I mean, it really genuinely is comedic.
Because he's trying to make a point about materialism, but he's also just taking it to such a reductio ad absurdum.
Yeah.
It's like, how could this not be funny?
You know?
Oh, yeah.
Well, I mean, also the deadpan stuff, and he's done some of this in a few places, but the...
And, like, within profound, otherwise profound insights, but, like, you know, 152, The Greatest Change.
The lighting and colors of everything have changed.
We no longer fully understand how the ancients experienced what was most familiar and frequent.
For example, the day and waking.
It reminds me of that thing.
It's like, here are some of our crazy illusions that there are, you know, that there are identical things, that there are things.
It's like, all right, well, shit, what are we left with here?
Things have changed.
Like, waking up.
That's where he does that one.
I mean, the one...
Obviously, I think we were going to talk about the death of God stuff today, I presume, right?
Wasn't that the...
Yeah, I mean, that was our major focus last time, and we can continue on with it.
I don't think we talked about the Mad Men section that much.
Right, the Mad Men section.
But, I mean, the one leading up to it, which makes that exact point, that Horizon of the Infinite...
Which one?
Which number?
One 24, the one that leads up to the Mad Men is...
Yeah.
I mean, I think it's, you know, equally as good as the sort of Shadows of God, you know, aphorism that starts the whole thing, it giving a tone for, like, here's what's at stake here, right?
And so this is where he's like, we've left the land and have embarked, we've burned our bridges behind us, we've gone further and destroyed the land behind us.
Now, little ship, look out, beside you is the ocean.
To be sure, it doesn't always roar, and at times it spread out like silk and gold and reveries of graciousness.
But hours will come when you realize that it is infinite, and that there's nothing more awesome than infinity.
Oh, the poor bird that felt free and now strikes the walls of this cage.
Whoa, when you feel homesick for the land, as if it had offered more freedom, and there's no longer any land, right?
Like, so, I mean, and that's the thing that's at stake for him in that sense.
It's like, everything.
Everything.
You know, there's, that, in fact, freedom, you know, requires a sense of home.
It's a product of constraint.
Yeah.
The bird is like, give me my cage so I can be free, right?
Like, and that sense of, and I mean, I, like, you know, this is to me, you know, we've talked about this before, but like, when I think about space, when I actually think about it, and don't just do a model of the solar system in my head, but when I think about the space of space, it terrifies me, right?
Like, I mean, I can genuinely induce a panic attack in myself if I allow myself to think, like, to push that thinking in a certain direction.
Because of this, it's the infinite sea.
It's like, that's just too much stuff.
Well, I've never come close to a panic attack with it, but the closest I can get, it's when two concepts converge.
It's the, you know, like, you create the model of that sort of space, and it's like, you have to wrap your head around with, like, how fucking far the moon is from the Earth, the Sun from the Earth, the Jupiter.
Like, the space in between this is insane, but as long as you're sort of, um, have Earth at the center, it doesn't matter how far out it goes, there's a stabilizing device.
It's a model.
You have a model.
To me, it's, you have a mental model.
If you, that, that's to me the difference is, the way that I think of what I'm, how I'm thinking differently is, I stop thinking in terms of a model, and start thinking in terms of the experience of the space.
Yeah, because the infinite, well, because the, because the infinite, the concept of the infinite breaks the model, it's like.
That's right, not, there's no points.
Once there are no more boundaries, then there's not a point either.
Right, that's right.
And then you start thinking the expanse of the infinite, and then that erases the point.
Now you've lost any sense of groundedness.
I mean, this is why I'm on benzodiazepines.
Because you think about space.
As he reaches for a bottle.
It's not even, it's not even a joke, though.
I think it's genuinely true.
It's like, and I think there's this way in which it's allowed me to understand, because Nietzsche will frequently say, there are lots of things that I feel like I can understand cognitively that I don't sort of, the concepts, I don't experience them with an intensity.
And that's an example of one.
And so, like, you can think about the solar system and the enormous amount of space without it having any kind of visceral impact.
Like, I can do that.
Like, I can image, as you know, we all learned in second grade or whatever, like the solar system and stuff.
But then there's also a different kind of way of relating to that concept that is more affectively driven rather than cognitively modeled.
And it's the same, I mean, it's the same thinking, but it's a totally different style.
And one is safe and easy and allows me to, you know, to make conclusions.
The other is absolutely terrifying, right?
Like, no joke.
Like, genuinely scary, like, got a Xanax scary.
Like, I mean, seriously, like, I can, at this stage of my life, like, I can induce that.
And I can stop it, too.
I'm like, I know, okay, don't start thinking in that direction because I know where that goes.
I find it, I find that even if you, like, with a concept like subjectivity, which could not be any, like, smaller than space, right?
It's so localized, and yet in certain articulations, like even in Nietzsche or in Hegel, the vastness of the potential of a concept like that can induce similar effects.
I would say, I mean, yes, I was talking about space and it makes it think that it's just distance.
But to me, the way more powerful one than space, because I just don't come across space, is history.
And, like, I mean, the sort of, the incredible proliferation of multiplicity that is history and the idiosyncrasy and contingency of the accrued habitual ways of acting and believing and thinking.
And, like, that to me is, that's the same thing.
It's just, like, it's so fucking massive and so fucking, you know, so repetitious that it's still, it induces that vertigo, you know?
See, I can't get to space or time.
Space or time don't terrify me experientially because they're so easy to model.
It's only the infinite of direction and the infinite of multiplicity that conceptually breaks those for me.
But the experiential one that's always been, one of the ones that drove me to philosophy was, I think, as Nate, you were saying, is that of subjectivity and my own subjectivity.
And, like, the terror of always already permeated boundaries and the threat of, you know, the sovereignty of the eye is, I mean, that took me, is also why philosophy has been my greatest therapist, because it's allowed me to make peace with the reality of that.
Whereas everything before it, in any sort of, like, non-philosophical orientation to it, is a coping mechanism of, basically, a coping mechanism of denial.
It's like, you know, we're reinforcing of that boundary.
That's the only thing that gives me experientially and, you know, frankly, thank God for philosophy.
Well, in some ways you can say that, I mean, I think I would end up saying the same thing, because what I'm talking about, when I talk about panic attacks, is a relation to subjectivity, right?
Like, that's actually what I'm, like, okay, here's a way that this thing ruptures in ways that scares the fuck out of me, you know?
But even, like, a thought of, you know, think about the opening to Truth and Lies, and, you know, like, the, you know, the story of, like, oh, there was this, like, nice little planet, and people, like, there was a species there, and one clever beast created truth, and then the star died a few breaths later and was all over.
Or, like, you know, he makes references like this, like, life is definitely not the rule, it's the exception, it's like the mold on the crust of an orange that, you know, there are so, like, it will go away at some point.
And that, I try to think why that doesn't bother me.
In fact, it gives me a certain kind of comfort.
Hope, yeah.
Very kind.
Maybe part of it is just, like, there's the narrative to us, like, there's a close to the narrative, right?
Like, it doesn't take away from the notion that something happened.
Something happened here, and then global warming, sun congealing, asteroid crashes into the planet, whatever it is.
There's, like, there's a narrative arc that almost, in some ways, affirms or verifies that something happened.
Not, you know, better or worse than other things, but something distinct.
Every once in a while, that thought will give me some, if I'm feeling a little bit anxious, like, about the start of the semester or something, just the thought of, like, how essentially meaningless all of this.
It's just an arbitrary, we're just arbitrary.
I mean, I just don't like that word, meaningless.
It's not meaning, to me, it's not meaningless at all.
Well, the meaning is arbitrary.
I mean, the meaning is.
But the meaning, the meaning isn't transcendentally imposed upon us, right?
Right, that's what I mean.
It's only meaningful because we create transcendentally.
Right, that's what it means.
It's the most meaningful thing in the world, like, in the universe.
It's what meaning is, for fuck's sake.
Right, right.
But it's absurd, in a way.
Like, all the systems and structures that we built, and, like, the institutions that we try to kind of accommodate, and all the stuff that day-to-day feels really important, doesn't really mean much.
Like, it doesn't mean much on a grand scale.
It doesn't, but it means, because that's where it's tough, because it's everything.
Like, it doesn't have any transcendent value or validity, but it's, like, everything to our lives.
It's the things that structures how we feel, how we perceive, how we interact, how we relate, right?
Like, all of those things.
So, it's like, there's a level at which you go, like, the educational institution, as an example.
Like, this institution, I just think, we're seeing it starting to happen.
But, like, in 200 years, it's just not going to look anything, anything, anything like what we're talking about right now.
But it's, and that doesn't mean that it's meaningless or irrelevant.
It's, in fact, the organizing principle for so much of what the three of us, not collectively, but just in our own individual lives.
Like, it has defined our lives in such substantial ways that to call it meaningless is to posit meaning as only, like, universal and absolute.
And it's like, no, man.
What if meaning actually is just how these historical things are formulated?
And then, you know, the academic institution is fucking everything.
Like, it's...
Meaning is only an intervention into other structures.
Yeah.
It's only meaning-making.
No, I agree.
Can I, can I...
Oh, go for it, Nate.
Sorry.
I was just going to say, that's probably why it only occasionally gives me comfort.
Because, actually, all these things are extremely meaningful.
And, but if you can trick your mind and be like...
Oh, as the coping mechanism.
So, like, I'm overwhelmed by the semester.
Ah, it's all meaningless.
I mean, look, when you're done.
Right, none of this means anything.
Right, or, like, you know, or, like, if you get embarrassed, like, while you're giving
a presentation or something, just kind of, you try to scope out and be like...
If you fart while you're teaching.
Almost the whole...
Right, the whole world didn't see that.
Only a couple people and they forgot about it already.
On an age of YouTube.
So, like...
That probably lives forever.
In TikTok, yeah.
It's going to be on TikTok.
Nate, your face just got worried.
Yeah.
Uh-oh.
Let's just get the Nathaniel mon...
Let's get back to the Nathaniel monologue.
I rudely interrupted him about 15 minutes ago.
He was in the middle.
He was on a roll, man.
And I just started laughing.
And that was really...
You didn't even let him start.
Yeah, you just kind of went into your own thing.
You're like, I got some thoughts in my head.
Why don't I fucking say them?
I've been trying to get us to this aphorism for a bit.
About an hour.
I was like, no, I was kidding, man.
But, okay, go to...
What aphorism do you want to go to, man?
Well, I've got to remember why I was going there.
There are two reasons.
There are...
Okay, I know I at least remember one of them.
And it's the...
It goes way back to the feeling of being cut off from the land.
The destruction of the land being...
Ah, yeah.
The panic attack.
Out to sea.
The panic attack and the death of God in general.
And just trying to reconcile that sense of lostness with the shadows of God.
And the sort of, like, the inability for some kind of complete rupture.
And, you know, in one sense, we are out to sea.
In another sense, not so much at all.
And so this is the aphorism 143, the greatest advantages of polytheism.
And the other reason I wanted to turn to it was trying to think about the breaking of the herd mentality
vis-a-vis the artifice of the gods and, you know, as the production of the individual against the herd mentality.
The greatest advantage of polytheism.
For an individual to posit his own ideal and to derive it from his own law, joys, and rights.
That may well have been considered hitherto the most outrageous of human aberrations and idolatry itself.
Indeed, the few who dared it always felt the need to apologize to themselves, usually as follows.
Not I, not I, but a god through me.
The wonderful art and power of creating gods, polytheism, was that through which this drive could discharge itself,
purify, perfect, and ennoble itself.
For originally it was a base and undistinguished drive related to stubbornness, disobedience, and envy.
To be hostile to this drive, to have one's own ideal, that was formerly the law of every morality.
There was only one norm, the human being.
And every people believed itself to have this and one ultimate norm.
But above and outside oneself, in a distant overworld, one got to see a plurality of norms.
One god was not the denial or the anathema to another god.
Here, for the first time, one allowed oneself individuals.
Here, one first honored the rights of individuals.
The invention of gods, heroes, and overmen of all kinds, as well as deviant or inferior forms of human-annoyed life, dwarves, fairies, centaurs, satyrs, demons, and devils,
was the invaluable preliminary exercise for the justification of the egoism and sovereignty of the individual.
The freedom that one conceded to a god in his relation to other gods, one finally gave to oneself in relation to laws, customs, and neighbors.
Atheism, in contrast, this rigid consequence of the teaching of a normal human type, that is, the belief in the normal god next to whom there are only false pseudo-gods, was perhaps the greatest danger to humanity so far.
It threatened us with this premature stagnation, which, as far as we can tell, most other species have long reached, for all of them believe in one normal type and ideal for their species, and have translated the morality of custom definitively into flesh and blood.
In polytheism, the free-spiritedness and many-spiritedness of humanity received preliminary form, the power to create for ourselves our own new eyes, and ever again new eyes that are ever more our own, so that for humans alone, among the animals, there are no eternal horizons and perspectives.
The feeling of having lost a tether.
There are two other ways of orienting ourselves.
And one is within the multiplicity of this sort of chorus of individuals, gods.
And then the other one is still the monotheistic one, the shadows of God, which, you know, I mean, I put this in the margins next to here.
Our monotheism is not, you know, no longer Christianity, but it is truth and justice or something like that.
And all other, you know, we, our liberalism is completely satisfied with plurality so long as none of the individual gods surpass the, you know, the overarching monotheistic true God of liberal tolerance or of some kind of sense of, oh, some version of humanism.
And just all of the other ways that that sort of monotheistic drive has been transformed and, and still sort of like anchor us.
I have always liked passages like this in Nietzsche as well.
Um, the sort of, um, advocacy of polytheism for these kinds of reasons, right?
This, that, because, I mean, this is when you get a sense of when he talks about the death of God, he's not talking about the death of gods.
And that there is, he sees something in the deification of, you know, in this case, sort of like the things that I happen to like, right?
Like I happen to be inclined in a certain way.
So I'm going to, my God's going to be one that favors those kinds of, you know, um, and that my God isn't mutually exclusive to your God.
And the gods have to figure out their own, you know,
They have their own drama.
Right.
Live their own drama.
I mean, the Greeks, right?
Obviously is the, is the, is the model for this, but it does.
I do, I do think that there is, it's just hard to imagine because we live so deeply embedded in a historical monotheism that it's just, it's, it's hard to imagine really like when, you know, when you, even when I read like Plato, it's sort of hard to imagine them really kind of taking the polytheism seriously.
Because I'm so immersed in a monotheism, you know, it's, it's just, it does feel like it's a totally different order of, of living.
Um, I mean, I can say the words polytheism and I can talk about the dynamics, but I can't imagine, you know, think about the, in truth and lies at the end where he says like, you know, imagine what it's like to live in a world where you see yourself surrounded by acts of gods at, at all times.
There are actual fairies and nymphs in the forest and a goddess could ride it on the chariot, you know, in the middle of the day in a market.
Right.
That's unimaginable, you know.
So, so I, so I like that.
I mean, I like that thinking of, you know, the different types of theisms reflect different, I mean, this is a typical, you know, different types of life, right?
Like different, they're different expressions of life.
Um, but they're also formative of the, of the lives.
And so the extent to which, I mean, I guess part of my point is the extent to which I'm so deeply formed by monotheism that I genuinely can't conceptualize polytheism.
Like I can, you know, like the, the solar system, I can model it.
I can think about, yes, what it means, but I can't imagine what it would be like to actually live that way.
And that's what I think is cool about the kind of psychology that Nietzsche offers is he's like, you got to think about the psychology of the totally other, right?
That's, that's really, that's just really foreign.
Well, what, what would a polytheism, well, yeah, I guess you're asking the same question.
What would it look like for an individual to adopt a polytheism?
Because the way I'm taking it is like an historical, cultural thing.
Like, like the image of thought.
Like a belief system.
But I think the important thing with any polytheism, a truly, true polytheism is it can't have boundaries.
It can't be like, you know, I have adopted polytheism and there's a creed for this polytheism.
The polytheism is more like the milieu in which one operates.
Where I have my God, the only, but I think, John, you already pointed it out, is that the orientation to the conception of other gods is one of strife and relative of, yes.
An agonism rather than one of truth and falsity, right?
So it's not a, other people believe other things and they are wrong about it.
Or even a, other people believe other things and we all might be wrong about it or somebody's right about it.
Right.
It's not about wrong or right or truth or accuracy.
It's about power.
My dad would kick your dad's ass.
Yeah.
Or like your dad deals with these kinds of things and my dad deals with those kinds of things and, you know, they don't even really care about each other.
But, you know, you mentioned Plato, John, and, you know, like it's hard to imagine a polytheism with Plato.
And I think that is also just particular to Plato because he just so easily reads monotheistically.
And in fact, I mean, it's like, I mean, I think that's kind of part of what got, I think, you know, Socrates' orientation to polytheism was complicated at best.
But, like, he was definitely killed for, you know, for impiety to the gods.
And, you know, in 149 here, Nietzsche brings up Plato along with Pythagoras as sort of reformers of Greek religion and unsuccessful in their reformation of Greek religion and only sort of like sectarian leaders.
But what I found the most powerful about that is, you know, he doesn't look to Plato and Pythagoras and Pedicules and the Orpheus and others as the interesting things.
It's more their pot with their, the effect of their power on the masses, which at least for their milieu, Nietzsche would say they're not even masses.
They're too heterogeneous.
This is towards the body, you mean the Luther stuff?
Yeah, it's towards the Luther stuff.
And he's like, look, the fact that...
The more general and unconditional the influence of an individual, the idea of an individual can be, the more homogenous and the lower must the mass be that is influenced.
While counter-movements give evidence of counter-needs that also want to be satisfied and recognized.
Conversely, we may also always infer that a civilization is really high when powerful and domineering natures have little influence and create only sects.
This applies also to the various arts in the fields of knowledge.
When someone rules, there are masses.
And where we find masses, we find a need to be enslaved.
Where men are enslaved, there are few individuals, and these are opposed by herd instincts and conscience.
Right?
So don't, don't create religions.
Yeah.
You know.
Well, or, or...
Or create sects.
It's not about...
Create religions.
It doesn't, it doesn't matter.
Like, you know, Plato may have been trying to create a religion.
Pythagoras certainly was, right?
It has nothing to do with what you're trying to do.
It has everything to do with the conditioning of the people for, like, what is possible to take up with them.
So, I mean, here, this is actually a little bit earlier up from where you read.
So, you know, Plato, Empedocles, Pythagoras, the Orphic enthusiasts were out to found new religions.
And the former two, Plato and Pythagoras, had souls and talents, which were so much those of founders of religious religions that one cannot wonder enough at their failures.
Yet all they managed to found were sects.
Every time the reformation of an entire people fails and only sects raise their heads, one may conclude that the people is already very heterogeneous and is starting to break away from the crude herd instinct of the morality of custom.
Which brings us back to the polytheism thing.
So, to, like, go back to your question, Nate.
Like, polytheism is, importantly, it cannot be doctrinal or dogmatic, right?
It can only be a milieu of agonism, where in no particular line could dominate it.
That, you know, we're talking about, the other language we could use is, like, one of biodiversity.
Is that no particular idea could possibly take sufficient enough root.
It could take root with some people, or it could become regionally important.
But it couldn't become imperial at all.
Yeah.
Well, there has to be competition if you want to stick to the biodiversity thing.
I mean, not in that strict sense, but the way I was taking part of this.
Not in the capitalistic sense, but in an agonistic sense.
Right, right.
Like, polytheism also suggests that it allows for the development of concepts and sort of the dispersing of conceptual paradigms.
So, like, the whole reason we have, like, a good version of science that works is because people allowed for that to happen.
Or whatever.
You know, like, the changes in the kind of grain and texture of our thinking, that itself, I mean, that almost seems like ontologically there's a polytheism that enables that kind of, you know what I'm saying?
I mean, like, a general sense of multiplicity, but I think that monotheism allows for concepts, right?
I mean, certainly, like, herd instincts allow for concepts, right?
Even just, like, pre-religious herd instincts, like, there are saber-toothed tigers.
We need to run from them.
There's a concept right there, right?
But then there's, you know, he sort of says that, like, the most radical or one of the most radical breaks in the evolution of man is the very possibility of some people turning against the herd.
And not being killed for it.
And they couldn't even take ownership of their own actions.
They said, it wasn't me that has this idea that runs heterogeneous to the herd.
God did it through me.
It's the god, right?
And, you know, if there's a certain kind of stability, not a stability of homogeneity and not a stability of sort of, like, coherence, but a stability of, like, not everything needs to cohere in order for life to happen.
And, like, a survivable, like, a baseline of survivability that allows for a more heterodox orientation to the world, then something like polytheism can arise.
And, you know, like, his claim here about, like, a strong culture is one wherein the herd mentality is impossible to reintroduce itself.
Well, that's why he says it's usually dismissed as mere decay of morals and corruption, although, in fact, it proclaims the egg is approaching maturity and the eggshell is about to be broken.
That's the sort of sense of multiple sects rather than religions.
But the concepts are able to be formed even through religion, like, codified religion, and even monotheism.
I mean, like you mentioned.
Well, so let's think about this.
Let's think about this, and let's take a current context, right?
Like, one of the claims that's been made consistently for the last 20 years and is, you know, even louder today is the fragmentation of contemporary American society, right?
Like, we no longer have the homogeneity that we had in the 50s, right?
And so, you know, and that is seen as a sign and symptom of, like, this is why politics seems like democracy is fragile and it could fall apart because we don't have this, like, baseline belief that for any number of different reasons, any number of different people are suspect of the grand narratives, right?
Like, this is the postmodernism thing.
So how does that, I mean, how does that play out?
Because, I mean, it seems to me as if what you actually end up getting in this sect version, as we see it in our world, is just different monotheisms trying to overwrite each other, right?
Like, so, for instance, even in the Egyptian, you know, polytheistic culture, you still had a king of fucking gods, right?
And even in the Greeks, Zeus was still, you know, like, you still had hierarchy.
That's what I want to go back to because those are so old and sedimented.
Like, I mean, even just, you know, I think when we did the Derrida, Plato's Pharmacy, and I think for all of us, you know, turning, like, returning to that Egyptian stuff was far more interesting.
And the thing that I get with Egyptian mythology that I have a harder time getting with Greek mythology, although I get it more and more, is you talk about the vastness of history.
There's not one king of the Egyptian gods.
There are multiple of them.
It kind of depends on, like, is it Amon, is it Ra, is it, and you realize that these are, you know, you know, at one point in time, it may have been very clear.
At another point in time, it gets far more complicated.
And, you know, you get these different positings of this is the god and here's why.
And, you know, it probably relates to one sect of Egyptian culture, and then they encounter another one.
They have to be incorporated.
And then, you know, like a good chunk of, like, the mythologizing is, all right, well, what's the narrative conduit through which, you know,
Amon and Ra get connected to each other, which means that they're not just pseudonyms for the same thing, but they're also ones not higher or lower.
Like, there's these strange passages between them.
And the same is true for the Greeks.
Like, yes, Zeus is the king of the gods, but only because he established himself over the Titans and he is constantly undermined.
Yeah, he's struggling.
Yeah, he's constantly struggling against other gods in various ways.
Yeah, yeah.
So, like, sometimes it feels like he is on top.
Other times it feels like he's precariously on top.
Other times it just feels like he's another god.
This is a little bit — so, I don't know why I'm thinking about it this way.
I don't think it's remotely correct.
But, like, what if polytheism refers to, like, historical trajectory, not one – so, like, you were saying, John,
it feels like everybody – there's all these different sects, but they're all a version of monolingualism or monotheism.
Oh, Jesus, monotheism.
Right.
What if polytheism is just a condition of possibility for the elaboration of several different monotheisms?
Like, so, like, you go along, you're trudging along in one kind of paradigm, and then somebody like Nietzsche comes along and reorganizes it.
But then it just kind of splits off, and there's multiple – there's always just multiple monotheisms, at least in the general.
But that's – I mean, I think that that's right, because, for instance, like, I have a very good friend who is a pastor of Christianity, and she, you know, does – she constantly wants to distance herself from the Christianity of the evangelicals and the Christianity – you know, in other words, the point being, Christianity is not itself one thing, right?
Like, it is, of course, heterogeneous.
But nevertheless, like, I still have this thing, and maybe this returns to a question that I would want to put to why he is so interested in polytheism is because, to me, the problem is once – whenever you bring in transcendence, like, whenever you bring in an otherworldly justification or explanation for an action, for a morality, for a belief, or whatever,
you introduce the problem, right?
Like, to me, you introduce – it's a power move that is unassailable, right?
Like, it's – I mean, one can disagree with that god or whatever, but it's like, man, fucking god said this.
Like, you introduce an unassailable power, transcendent power position.
Whether that's done polytheistically or not, like, I mean, I believe that there is – I believe that there is a difference, and I take your point in terms of the Zeus thing.
I think that that – I think that that is right.
But it actually seems to me as if everyone's always trying to invent monotheisms.
It's just that sometimes they don't take, maybe, at some historical moments, and then we call it polytheism.
You know what I mean?
Like, so polytheism isn't a thing.
It's just a failure.
Maybe that's what his claim is here.
I don't know.
But I – but yeah, I mean, I think so because, like, look, he says, like, Plato trying to start a religion.
Pythagoras trying to start a religion, right?
Yeah.
But it's not a – but it doesn't reveal much about them so much as it –
The cultural conditions in which they're –
The cultural conditions.
So it's like, yeah, it's going to take root in some people.
But I think the other thing that really matters is what is the instinctive orientation to difference from the people in which it takes hold of?
If it is the transcendent position of mine is right and yours is wrong, not just mine is mine and yours is yours, then it is just struggling monotheisms because it's me against the world or us against the world.
If the orientation is, like, yeah, I got my thing and you got your thing and sometimes they butt heads and sometimes they create friction between each other and sometimes they have nothing to do with each other and the orientation is one of agonism rather than antagonism and especially truth and falsity, then, like, that's the difference in the orientation.
So, you know, I mean – and there's also, like, the imperial – we're talking about an imperial – monotheism is an imperial impulse, right?
And we look at, like, our own contemporary moment and it feels like a different kind of war.
It is a war of imperialism and colonization, not a war of the expulsion of strength or the expression of strength, right?
Like, which I think, you know, is another way – he's, like, you know, I think polytheism for him is the war of the expression of power rather than that of territorializing, dominating, colonizing, extraction of resource sort of thing.
Like, you know, one is – to bring it to the dice roll thing, monotheism, imperialism is the playing the game, playing the odds, playing to win, whereas polytheism is a matter of just the simple – like, is just simply playing the game.
The thing that's just sort of popping in the back of my mind is that, you know, and this is a line of his from, what, Birth of Tragedy, probably?
But Rome versus Judea, which is polytheism versus monotheism, you know?
And it's clear who won, right?
Like, it's, you know, monotheism – like, the papacy is in Rome, right?
Like, it's clear who won that battle.
And, I mean, I don't know.
I still increasingly am feeling like polytheism is not a condition so much as it's just the absence of a dominant monotheism.
Well, except for – well, Rome, because I usually hear that – you know, I do remember that one.
But, you know, like the – like Saint – was it – not Jeremias, what's his name?
Jerome.
Saint Jerome says, you know, like, what does Athens have to do with Jerusalem?
And, you know, like, there again, like polytheism, you know, against –
Right, right, right.
Except for Rome is an interesting wrinkle to that narrative because –
It's imperial power.
Exactly, right?
Because, like, Judaic monotheism was, you know, quite regional and unimportant for a very long time.
And it's not the polytheism of Rome that really matters.
It's the – it's the monotheistic imperialism, right?
So it's like secular – like, mono – like, secular imperialism meets religious monotheism.
Like, that was the great atom bomb of Christianity.
I think it would be – that's one of those – like, I know so little of Roman history.
Yeah.
You know, I think that's a really interesting time.
It was 400 – like, before Constantine – like, so, okay, we can say with Constantine,
Christianity becomes the imperial religion and then European history sort of starts, right?
Like – but, like –
Yeah.
Prior to that, I mean, the – I don't know enough about it.
But I imagine that's just an incredibly fascinating time to think, like, how did religion actually operate for those few hundred years, right?
Like, I mean –
It was incredibly heterogeneous.
What was it?
Well, that's what I'm wondering.
Like, was it, in fact, that – I mean, because, I mean, I just – you know, when you find the ruins, it's always like, here's a temple to this person and a temple to that person and a temple to that – or this god or that god or the other god.
It's one of my favorite periods of history.
People were adherents of this thing and not that thing, and, yeah.
Right, but, again, like, you know, and, I mean, I think even Paul mentions this in the letter to the Corinthians, but he's, like – he's making fun of polytheism and, you know, he makes fun of – you know, they have all the different statues and you have to make sacrifices to all of the different gods.
And then there's the statue of the unknown god, just in case you forgot one.
And, you know, it's like – and the comic relief is like, well, if you just have the right god, then you know what to deal with.
But, you know, here is a – you know, one is operating within a world of the unknowable, like, you know, we're on the stage for the gods, and the gods have us for their stage and their own drama going on.
So there's not a one-to-one cohesive, like, disconnect.
Like, it is far more chaotic.
And, like, this is very much so true within the Roman context as well, especially because, you know, Rome is so imperial.
It's – it has – and its policies are maybe not as liberal as those of ancient Persia, which were just, like, laissez-faire, like, worship whoever you want.
But it was very sort of, like, keep your regional gods, you know, do your thing.
And it was, in some ways, a policy of tolerance, like, we're not going to change your religion so long as you acknowledge –
You pay your taxes.
As long as you pay your taxes.
As long as you acknowledge Rome as your – you know, your secular god.
Or at least – and oftentimes – and this is the big thing that was the problematic for monotheistic religions is, you know, keep your own gods.
Just include ours, too, right?
Like, ours make your docket.
And this is obviously not tolerable for a monotheistic culture.
But what was monotheistic about it was, I mean, the infrastructure, the language, the architecture, right?
Even just the architecture of the thing.
I mean, like, Latinitas is the sort of the imperial tool rather than religion.
But, you know, it's like – so, in many ways, I always see Rome as the great creator of infrastructure that almost any idea can parasitically infect.
It just so happened to be, you know, a particular sect of Judaism that just, like, found itself coursing throughout all of the material infrastructure of Rome.
And, you know, it just tapped that imperial, like, like, monotheism, like, monotheism, like, imperialism, and just inflected it religiously.
It's like – that's – that's why, you know, it can't just be mono – like, when I hear monotheism there, I don't hear strictly religion, like, in terms of religion.
When I hear polytheism, I don't hear strictly religion either.
Right.
I understand that.
Yeah.
I wasn't really thinking of religion exclusively at all with that.
I was thinking of, like, forms of thought, right?
I mean, that's—Nietzsche's thing is that pretty much every line of thinking is susceptible to a theistic logic or a theological structure, right?
I mean, science is susceptible.
The arts are susceptible.
Well, what is science without Christianity and Rome, right?
Could science even exist?
Because it has to be predicated on an elusive real world that we are not capable of accessing except through a very particular methodology.
And it is monotheistic in that that one truth is the case.
And it's imperial and it's sort of—and it's justification for the use of power to impose that empirical reality on everything else.
One of the—I forget which—
Which produces concepts just in a—on a highway.
He takes down the potential arrogance of science in a very short section where he basically says that—
that they're—basically we've gotten better at describing things with precision.
But we still have no explanation of literally—like, where did life come from?
How did chemical processes come about?
We can describe them in increasing detail.
How does cause actually relate to it?
What is the cause and what is an effect?
But we have no sense of origin or cause or causality still.
Like, that's still true since Nietzsche had, like, wrote that.
That's still true today.
You know, so we had, like, science—but then again, like, I don't think modern science claims to really do anything else besides describe shit either.
Right?
I mean, it's like—maybe back then it did.
But, like, not—when I think of, like, how science—
If it gets into political and cultural policy and practice, then it does.
And science becomes the substantiating force for then.
You know, because, like, you read most scientific papers.
Like, all right, well, you know, there's a correlation between X and Y.
And here's the significance of that correlation.
And it's not making a cause-effect claim.
It's imagining probabilities, possibilities, like, distance between, effectively, descriptions.
Like, here's one description.
Here's another description.
Those two descriptions just so happen to come, you know, paired up quite often.
But then once it gets translated into, now what do we do with this?
Now it's like, because of, you know, these scientific facts, now we act, you know, in this sort of way.
And it is completely monotheistic.
Yeah.
Although—
Here's the truth following.
Oh, yeah.
Were you going to say something, John?
Yeah, I mean, I'm more of a fan of science.
Oh, I like science.
I want to take it in as somewhat – because, you know, one of the things that – whether – I just find it hard to think of science as monotheistic in that regard.
I get the idea of there being one truth, like, it's either this or it's that.
But I also feel like in the last, I don't know, 50, 60 years, there's just enough stuff coming out of, whether it's theoretical physics or computational, you know, like, that doesn't really think that, right?
Like, that we –
On the fringe.
Well, I don't know if it's – I don't know if it's the fringe.
I mean, I actually, you know, like – I grant that it's not generalized, right?
Like, it's not some massive majority at all.
But I do feel like these are – they're really important.
Oh, I think it's – I think even the monotheistic stuff is important.
Like, you know, don't get me wrong.
I don't think that is – like, we need to rebel against it.
Like, I mean, here – like, the pandemic was a good – is a good example for that sort of, like, monotheistic imperialism taking hold is that, you know, the scientific operation multiplied the pandemic and possible responses to it.
And the cultural legislative orientation to it was to narrow it, was to – and what was interesting to me – because I think narrowing it and making it actionable was the right move, right?
Like, because there needs to be some kind of, like, to have a strategy.
We need a program.
There has to be some kind of coherence, right?
But that was never the justification for why we're all doing this thing, right?
It was never like, look, there are a lot of different things that we could do.
All of them may work.
None of them may work.
But whatever it is –
We're just going to arbitrarily pick this thing.
Yeah, we're going to choose this one, and here's the deal.
We have to do it, right?
We all have to do it, right?
That wasn't – you know, like, for obvious reasons, that wasn't the rationale, even though that's effectively what we were doing.
And instead it was, this is the obvious, undeniable, right way of doing it, and if you don't do it, you're a science-denying cuckoo head.
But then how often those absolutes change day to day, even, like, within an hour, you'd have a new thing that you absolutely must do.
But this is why the non-scientific cuckoo heads, like, they were given life, because they're like, well, I can measure inconsistencies, and we used to have to do this thing, and you were stupid if you didn't do it.
And now you have to do this thing in 180 degrees, and you're stupid if you don't do it.
So they don't know what the fuck they're doing.
So they don't know what they're doing, and they think the whole thing is a joke, and the whole line of conspiracy theories comes out.
And I was like, you know, I don't think there's a good option there, because our primary mechanism for coercing behavior is to accord it with the truth and a knowledge system.
And there's just no way that saying, well, we're going to experiment with something, and the only thing that we feel pretty comfortable with is that we all have to be on the same page with this experiment.
Like, that wasn't going to work at all.
Yeah.
So that, well, it's true, and if you're a psycho, if you don't do it, that maybe had the next best shot of working.
And it worked mostly, kind of, but.
Well, I guess the stakes were so high, the stakes were so high that provisionality was not an option.
There's no way the CDC could have just been like, maybe we should do this, and you could try this out.
Like, there's no way in their policies that they could frame it in that kind of language.
So it had to be framed.
As soon as they got the information, they had to push it out there as, like, this is what we do now.
Now we wash our groceries.
We rinse off our grocery bags, right?
And then it's like, and then, so the distance between provisionality and absolutes collapsed and created absolute chaos politically.
Well, think about, like, how, like, washing, like, we all wash our groceries now.
Think about the variety of ways in which that disseminates, right?
There are the pious who are like, yes, we religiously wash our groceries because it is true and right and holy be thy banana washer, right?
And then there are the heterodox who are like, this is government conspiracy, you know, they want us to wash out the evidence that this is how they're planting chips in the brains, right?
And then there are the people who I would think were in this camp are like, okay, well, this is provisional, right?
Like, given sort of, like, what's going on, this does seem to have the best momentary chance of sort of slowing down the spread of this thing.
So, cool, I'll wash my vegetables now and then I'll be okay with it if it changes next week.
I just think that third category is very, very small.
Yeah, I think that was rare because, yeah, I mean, it just, I mean, everybody, it polarized people.
That's why it turned into a, but it turned into a holy world.
But that's, so that's partly what I'm saying about the polytheism question is that I don't think that polytheism is actually a thing.
It is just a situation in which no particular monotheism has dominated yet, right?
Like, in other words, it's not, you know, so that this is the case here is that you have the pious story, the pious counter story.
Neither one works, but I mean, that's, that's how I hear what you're saying is that polytheism, there aren't polytheisms.
There are just monotheisms that haven't yet, like, dominated.
That drama only happens within a more general monotheism, right?
That's not, that sectarian squabbling within a more general.
Okay, that may be true, that may be true, right?
Like, I mean, I buy that there's a difference between what we're talking about in terms of the sectarian, the Pythagoras, Plato, and Empedocles,
like the sectarian sort of infighting in those scenarios and, you know, people wanting to rule the world with their particular monotheistic views.
I mean, I buy that might be true.
But here, what I'm saying is the more general monotheistic backdrop is a, I'm not going to call it the practice of science,
because I'm totally with you, like, science is interesting and awesome and doing really cool stuff.
I mean, within a theological scientific metaphysics that has effectively replaced a notion of scientific truth in the place of religious and revealed religious truth.
Yeah, I mean, that's certainly one of Nietzsche's targets, right?
I mean, the will to truth and the will to science is, that's our contemporary shadow of God, right?
Like, that it's, that's certainly the case.
I'm not totally sold that that's, like, I think that that is a 19th century version of science.
I think that it is a dominant 21st century version of science.
But I also think that they're, like, to me, I see, I see in a lot of what we're, you know, again, this is partly the sci-fi me.
But, like, who, what, if you were to point to cultures or groups that are most invested in pushing or encouraging or giving birth to the overman and the overcoming of the human,
they're fucking scientists, right?
Like, do you know what I mean?
Like, they are, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They are people who are, like, you know, transhumanists or, I mean, that's, to me, they're not the only people, I'm not saying.
But, I mean, like, that there is something to this technological experimentation thing that doesn't necessarily recoil onto that theological version that is very real and historically dominant.
But, yeah, that's, I mean, to me, it's, like, there's something else there with the sciences.
I'm making a very strong distinction between what I see as a science, like, at a metaphysical level, the organizational center of a scientific truth that requires piety and fealty to it.
Yeah.
Which I think has dominated our common sense for a few thousand years and, you know, like, I mean, first religiously and then more recently under the sort of within.
So, maybe I'm talking more about, like, engineers than scientists.
No, I think you're talking about, no, no, no, no.
You're talking about scientists.
I'm making a difference between a metaphysics of scientific truth versus scientists who are people fucking around with things.
Right, right, yeah.
Right.
I mean, that's, like, yeah.
I mean, I would say the disciples of that metaphysics of science are probably not a lot of scientists, frankly.
Right, no.
Well, because, like, think about the people who made the vaccine or the hundreds of people who worked on it.
Yeah.
That was a miraculous feat to do it in that amount of time.
It took a ton of experimentation.
And it didn't take, like, what it didn't take is following a script.
It was like a wet and work drive.
Right.
But then the people who are either, like, sort of the people who are either explicitly anti-vax or, like, let's get 12 vaccines, they're taking up some sort of either theological or anti-theological position in relation to the science.
Which the science had no investment in that dialogue, right?
Like, the science just did something crazy and pretty cool.
And, of course, there could be some unforeseen consequences or whatever.
But the fact that they were able to...
No, no, no, no.
Unforeseen consequences.
Thinking with.
Thinking.
Yeah.
You're going to feast on this one.
Conceptuality is something other than itself.
There's been a change in the image of thought.
That's what it is.
The internal structure of a comment.
As soon as an utterance slips from the mouth, it's divorced from the subject.